Getting started update (#998)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/getting-started/query-data.md

# Query your data

With TimescaleDB, there's no need to learn a custom query language. **TimescaleDB
supports full SQL**. You can use your SQL knowledge along with the rich 
ecosystem of PostgreSQL tools, and add the extra features and performance of
TimescaleDB.

Here are some query examples so you can get familiar with using SQL alongside
popular TimescaleDB functions.

## Basic SQL queries
### Select all stock data from the last day.

   This query uses the [`WHERE`][clause-expressions] clause to only show results for
   timestamps within the last day. 

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '1 day';
   ```

> ### Select the top 10 stock values by price.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Select the top 10 stock trades by price.
```

Reviewer: These will likely all be the same stock symbol, with similar timeframe. Not sure what we would add to this to make it a little more interesting (I realize these are basic queries). Hmmmm.... 🤔

   This query uses the [`ORDER BY`][order-by] keyword to order the results by descending price
   and limit the number of results shown to 10. 

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
   ORDER BY price DESC
   LIMIT 10;   
   ```

### Calculate the average trade price for Apple from the last day

   This query uses the [`avg()`][average] function along with [`FILTER`][filter] and `WHERE` 
   to include only Apple trades made within the last day. Instead of using Apple's symbol, 
   the [`JOIN`][join] operator allows you to use the company name.  

   ```sql

>    SELECT
>    avg(price) FILTER (WHERE c.name = 'Apple')
>    FROM stocks_real_time srt
>    JOIN company c ON c.symbol = srt.symbol
>    WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '2 day';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 SELECT 
  avg(price) avg_price 
FROM 
  stocks_real_time srt 
  JOIN company c ON c.symbol = srt.symbol 
WHERE 
  c.name = 'Apple' 
  AND time > now() - INTERVAL '2 day';
```
Filter isn't a common way to query this and it doesn't add specific value here. I'd keep it simple and build.

   ```

## Advanced TimescaleDB SQL functions

Timescale has many custom-built SQL functions to help you perform time-series
analysis in fewer lines of code. Here's how to use three of these functions:

 * [first()][first]: find the earliest value based on a time within an aggregate group
 * [last()][last]: find the latest value based on time within an aggregate group
 * [time_bucket()][time-bucket]: bucket data by arbitrary time intervals and calculate aggregates over those intervals

### Get the first and last value with first() and last()

>    The `first()` and `last()` functions gets you the first and last value 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The `first()` and `last()` functions retrives the first and last value 
```

   within a column when ordered by another column. 
   
   For example, say you have a table with timestamp column `time` and numeric column `value`. If you 
   use `first(value, time)`, you get the first number in the `value` column when ordered 
   with respect to an increasing `time` column. 

   In this query, you use both the `first()` and `last()` functions to find the 
   first and last trading price for each company. With the `WHERE` clause, the interval of time is 
   limited to the last three days. 

   ```sql
   SELECT symbol, first(price,time), last(price, time)
   FROM stocks_real_time srt
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '3 days'

>    GROUP BY symbol;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   GROUP BY symbol
   ORDER BY symbol;
```

# Query your data

With TimescaleDB, there's no need to learn a custom query language. **TimescaleDB
supports full SQL**. You can use your SQL knowledge along with the rich 
ecosystem of PostgreSQL tools, and add the extra features and performance of
TimescaleDB.

Here are some query examples so you can get familiar with using SQL alongside
popular TimescaleDB functions.

## Basic SQL queries
### Select all stock data from the last day.

>    This query uses the [`WHERE`][clause-expressions] clause to only show results for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   To select all the stock data from the previous day use the [`WHERE`][clause-expressions] clause to only fetch results for
```

   timestamps within the last day. 

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt

>    WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '1 day';

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '4 days';
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure about this, but if the user runs the original query on Monday, nothing will show up probably because trading is closed on weekends. 4 days as the interval seems more safe

Reviewer 2: Yes, this happened to me on a Monday. Maybe a note about the time interval at the beginning of the section can help.  In my case, even an interval of 4 and 5 days did not work.
tsdb=# SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt                 
WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '4 day';
 time | symbol | price | day_volume 
------+--------+-------+------------
(0 rows)

tsdb=# SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '6 day';
tsdb=# SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '5 day';
 time | symbol | price | day_volume 
------+--------+-------+------------
(0 rows)

   ```

> ### Select the top 10 stock trades by price for the latest time period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Select the most recently traded top 10 stocks and sort by the price.
```

>    This query uses the [`ORDER BY`][order-by] clause to order the results by descending time then price

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Use the [`ORDER BY`][order-by] clause to display the results in  descending time, then the price
```

>    and limit the number of results shown to 10. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and limit the number of stocks displayed to 10. 
```

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
   ORDER BY time DESC, price DESC
   LIMIT 10;  
   ```

### Calculate the average trade price for Apple from the last day

>    This query uses the [`avg()`][average] function with a `WHERE` clause

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Use the [`avg()`][average] function with a `WHERE` clause
```

>    to include only Apple trades made within the last day. Instead of using Apple's symbol, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   to include only trades made for Apple on the last day of trading. 
```

>    the [`JOIN`][join] operator allows you to use the company name.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You can use the [`JOIN`][join] operator to fetch results based on the name of a company instead of the symbol.
```

   ```sql
   SELECT

>    avg(price)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       avg(price)
```

   FROM stocks_real_time srt

>       JOIN company c ON c.symbol = srt.symbol

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
JOIN company c ON c.symbol = srt.symbol
```

   WHERE c.name = 'Apple' AND time > now() - INTERVAL '4 days';
   ```

## Advanced TimescaleDB SQL functions

Timescale has many custom-built SQL functions to help you perform time-series
analysis in fewer lines of code. Here's how to use three of these functions:

 * [first()][first]: find the earliest value based on a time within an aggregate group
 * [last()][last]: find the latest value based on time within an aggregate group
 * [time_bucket()][time-bucket]: bucket data by arbitrary time intervals and calculate aggregates over those intervals

> ### Get the first and last value with first() and last()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Get the first and last value with first() and last() functions
```

   The `first()` and `last()` functions retrives the first and last value 
   within a column when ordered by another column. 
   

>    For example, say you have a table with timestamp column `time` and numeric column `value`. If you 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   For example, when you have a table with timestamp column `time` and numeric column `value`. If you 
```

   use `first(value, time)`, you get the first number in the `value` column when ordered 
   with respect to an increasing `time` column. 

   In this query, you use both the `first()` and `last()` functions to find the 

>    first and last trading price for each company. With the `WHERE` clause, the interval of time is 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   first and last trading price for each company. Use the `WHERE` clause, to limit the interval of time to 
```

>    limited to the last three days. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the last three days. 
```

   ```sql
   SELECT symbol, first(price,time), last(price, time)
   FROM stocks_real_time srt
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '3 days'
   GROUP BY symbol
   ORDER BY symbol;
   ```

### Aggregate by an arbitrary length of time using time_bucket

>    The `time_bucket()` function allows you to take a time column and “bucket” the values 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The `time_bucket()` function enables you to take a time column and “bucket” the values 
```

>    based on an interval of your choice. Often you "bucket" time so that you can perform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   based on an interval of your choice. Typically you "bucket" time so that you can perform
```

   an aggregation over the chosen interval. 
   

>    For example, say `time` is a timestamp column that shows values incrementing every hour 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   For example, if `time` is a timestamp column that shows values incrementing every hour 
```

>    and `value` is a numeric column. You want to aggregate `value` using the `sum()` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and `value` is a numeric column. You might want to aggregate `value` using the `sum()` 
```

>    function so that you get summed values over each day. To do this, you can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   function to get summed values over each day. To do this, you can
```

   use the `time_bucket()` function on the `time` column to “bucket” the hourly data into daily data, 
   then perform the `sum()` function on the `value` column to get the sum of your values across each day. 

   <img class="main-content__illustration"
    src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/getting-started/time-bucket.jpg"
    alt="time_bucket() Illustration"/>

   For more information on the `time_bucket()` function, see the [`time_bucket()` page][time-bucket] within our API 
   Reference section. 

   The next SQL query calculates the average stock trading price for each company
   over each day. Use the `time_bucket()` function with an interval of one day, include 
   the `avg()` function on price, and include `symbol` so you can group the average 

>    price calculations by company. The `WHERE` limits the results to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   price calculations by company. Use the `WHERE` to limit the results to
```

>    days within the last week. The [`GROUP BY`][clause-expressions] clause is necessary 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   days within the last week. Use the [`GROUP BY`][clause-expressions] clause 
```

>    for aggregation and allows you to group the results by the day and company. Finally the `ORDER BY` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   for aggregation and enables you to group the results by the day and company. Finally the `ORDER BY` 
```

>    clause orders the results first on the bucketed date, then by symbol. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   clause displays the results first on the bucketed date, then by the symbol. 
```

# Query your data

With TimescaleDB, there's no need to learn a custom query language. **TimescaleDB
supports full SQL**. You can use your SQL knowledge along with the rich 
ecosystem of PostgreSQL tools, and add the extra features and performance of
TimescaleDB.

Here are some query examples so you can get familiar with using SQL alongside
popular TimescaleDB functions.

## Basic SQL queries
### Select all stock data from the last day.

   This query uses the [`WHERE`][clause-expressions] clause to only show results for
   timestamps within the last day. 

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '1 day';
   ```

### Select the top 10 stock trades by price for the latest time period.

>    This query uses the [`ORDER BY`][order-by] keyword to order the results by descending time then price
>    and limit the number of results shown to 10. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This query uses the [`ORDER BY`][order-by] clause to order the results by descending time then price
   and limit the number of results shown to 10. 
```

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM stocks_real_time srt
   ORDER BY time DESC, price DESC
   LIMIT 10;  
   ```

### Calculate the average trade price for Apple from the last day

>    This query uses the [`avg()`][average] function along with [`FILTER`][filter] and `WHERE` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This query uses the [`avg()`][average] function with a `WHERE` clause
```

   and `value` is a numeric column. You would like to aggregate `value` using the `sum()` 
   function so that you get summed values over each day. To accomplish this you can
   use the `time_bucket()` function on the `time` column to “bucket” the hourly data into daily data, 
   then perform the `sum()` function on the `value` column to get the sum of your values across each day. 

   <img class="main-content__illustration"
    src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/getting-started/time-bucket.jpg"
    alt="time_bucket() Illustration"/>

   For more information on the `time_bucket()` function, see the [`time_bucket()` page][time-bucket] within our API 
   Reference section. 

   The next SQL query calculates the average stock trading price for each company
   over each day. Use the `time_bucket()` function with an interval of one day, include 
   the `avg()` function on price, and include `symbol` so you can group the average 
   price calculations by company. The `WHERE` limits the results to
   days within the last week. The [`GROUP BY`][clause-expressions] clause is necessary 

>    for aggregation and allows you to group the results by the day and company. Finally the `order by` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   for aggregation and allows you to group the results by the day and company. Finally the `ORDER BY` 
```

   clause orders the results first on the bucketed date, then by symbol. 

   ```sql
   SELECT
      time_bucket('1 day', time) AS bucket,
      symbol,
      avg(price)
   FROM stocks_real_time srt
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '1 week'
   GROUP BY bucket, symbol
   ORDER BY bucket, symbol;
   ```

For more information about the functions provided by TimescaleDB and Timescale Toolkit extension,
see the [API Reference for hyperfunctions](/api/:currentVersion:/hyperfunctions).

## Next steps
Now that you're familiar with some TimescaleDB queries and functions, like `time_bucket`, learn about
continuous aggregates in the [next section][create-cagg].

> <!--  had to make a change to create the pr -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Query your data

With TimescaleDB, there's no need to learn a custom query language. **TimescaleDB
supports full SQL**. You can use your SQL knowledge along with the rich 
ecosystem of PostgreSQL tools and add the extra features and performance of
TimescaleDB.

Here are some query examples so you can get familiar with using SQL alongside
popular TimescaleDB functions.

## Basic SQL queries

<highlight type="tip">
Many of the queries below show a filter for the last four days of data. This 
accounts for the nuance of stock trade data which only occurs Monday-Friday
on the New York Stock Exchange.

If you load the provided data on a Monday, the most recent data that we can provide 
is from Friday afternoon. Therefore, selecting data for the last day or two would return
no results.

Feel free to adjust the time frame based on the data that you downloaded and to
explore other time-ranges in the data that we provide.
</highlight>

### Select all stock data from the last four days

   To select all the stock data from the previous four days, use the [`WHERE`][clause-expressions] 

>    clause to filter the result using a relative time interval. We use an interval of
>    four days below in case the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   clause to filter the result using a relative time interval. This example uses an interval of
   four days, so data is displayed even if you run this on a weekend or a Monday.
```

   function on the price data, select the `symbol`, and finally [`GROUP BY`][clause-expressions]
   the `bucket` and `symbol`. The `WHERE` limits the results to days within the 
   last week. Finally the `ORDER BY` clause orders the results first on the bucketed date, 
   then by symbol. 

   ```sql
   SELECT
      time_bucket('1 day', time) AS bucket,
      symbol,
      avg(price)
   FROM stocks_real_time srt
   WHERE time > now() - INTERVAL '1 week'
   GROUP BY bucket, symbol
   ORDER BY bucket, symbol;

   bucket                       |symbol|avg               |
   -----------------------------+------+------------------+
   2022-04-26 20:00:00.000 -0400|AAPL  |157.16595920217668|
   2022-04-26 20:00:00.000 -0400|ABBV  | 157.8470588235293|
   2022-04-26 20:00:00.000 -0400|ABNB  |152.33858034970868|
   2022-04-26 20:00:00.000 -0400|ABT   |117.13218965517241|
   2022-04-26 20:00:00.000 -0400|ADBE  |398.63256560534745|
   2022-04-26 20:00:00.000 -0400|AMAT  |108.92946602133563|
   ```
   
   In the results above, you may notice that the `bucket` column, which represents
   a `time_bucket()` or one week, starts on the beginning date of the bucket, not

>    the current time that you run the query. We provide more details on how buckets
>    are calculated in the hyperfunction API documentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   the current time that you run the query. To learn more about how time buckets are
   calculated, see the [how-to guide for time buckets][time-bucket-how-to].
```

## Next steps
Now that you're familiar with some TimescaleDB queries and functions, like `time_bucket`, learn about
continuous aggregates in the [next section][create-cagg].

## Learn more about TimescaleDB hyperfunctions
For more information about the functions provided by TimescaleDB and Timescale Toolkit extension,
see the [API Reference for hyperfunctions](/api/:currentVersion:/hyperfunctions).

[average]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/functions-aggregate.html
[filter]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/sql-expressions.html#SYNTAX-AGGREGATES
[order-by]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/queries-order.html
[select-keywords]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/sql-select.html
[clause-expressions]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/queries-table-expressions.html

> [time-bucket]: /api/:currentVersion:/hyperfunctions/time_bucket

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[time-bucket]: /api/:currentVersion:/hyperfunctions/time_bucket
[time-bucket-how-to]: /how-to-guides/time-buckets/
```

### Get the first and last value with first() and last()

>    The `first()` and `last()` functions retrives the first and last value 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   The `first()` and `last()` functions retrieves the first and last value 
```

Reviewer 4: Edited Lana's suggestion: `retrieves` -> `retrieve`
